---
title: "For Reasons of the State – II: Notes on the Judicial Legacy of Justice M.R. Shah (Taxation)"
author: "Deepak Joshi"
date: 2023-05-20
editorsNote: "This guest post by Deepak Joshi is the second part of a two-part series on the judicial legacy of Justice M.R. Shah. It deals with the issue of tax jurisprudence, ought to be read along with – and complementary to – [Part One](/2023/05/15/for-reasons-of-the-state-notes-on-the-legacy-of-justice-m-r-shah/), by Abhinav Sekhri, which examined Justice Shah’s legacy in the field of criminal law."
tags:
  - "judges"
  - "taxation-and-the-constitution"
---

An examination of a judge’s contribution to the tax jurisprudence can be conducted in the context of the underlying themes of taxation. Do the judgments authored by the judge further build on the basic themes of tax law and policy or whether the judgments depart from the settled canons of tax law & policy without rhyme or reasons? To answer this query in the right earnest, one must embark on a quick journey on the importance of tax policies, basic tenets of tax law, and how Indian jurisprudence has stuck close to those basic tenets. It is only then can we analyse how far, how extreme, or how close to them the judicial philosophy of Justice M.R. Shah in tax matters has been.

The year 1776 is considered important as far as taxation is concerned. Constitutional law scholars, legal historians and political commentators refer to it as the year in which the Declaration of Independence of the United States first came into being. The importance lies in the fact that the Declaration of Independence came after years of struggle & protests against the unfair and arbitrary taxation policies adopted by the British Crown in its American colonies. Quite apart from this, Adam Smith also published his seminal work – The Wealth of Nations – in the year 1776. Adam Smith gave us the four essential canons of taxation – equality or equity, certainty, economy and convenience.

Indian tax jurisprudence has long recognised the above concepts in deciding disputes between taxpayers [“assessees”] and the tax department [“Revenue”]. The Hon’ble Supreme Court (“SC”) in the case of [Commr., Commercial Tax U.P vs M/S Oswal Greentech Limited](https://indiankanoon.org/doc/27896108/) has observed that consistency and certainty in tax matters is necessary. Clarity in tax law is necessary. The SC has acknowledged that the interpretative vision should also be on the same lines. The Court, in [Principal Commissioner of Income Tax, New Delhi vs. Maruti Suzuki India Ltd.](https://indiankanoon.org/doc/129565204/) stated in no less emphatic terms that there is a value which judiciaries must abide by in promoting the interests of certainty in tax litigation. Not doing so will only result in uncertainty and displacement of settled expectations. There is thus a significant value which must attach to observing the requirement of consistency and certainty. Individual affairs are conducted and business decisions are made in the expectation of consistency, uniformity and certainty. To detract from those principles is neither expedient nor desirable.

## Judicial introduction of onerous conditions for taxpayers

Under various indirect tax laws, there is a concept of input tax credit (“ITC”). In simple words, an assessee purchases goods/services and pays the tax on such purchase. At the time of onward sale of same goods/services or finished products, the assessee collects tax on such sale. However, while discharging its tax liability for the relevant period, an assessee is entitled to avail ITC of the tax paid on purchases and thus deposit only the net amount after deducting the ITC to the tax department. This helps in better fund management and also avoids the cascading effect of tax on tax. The conditions for availing such ITC are often mentioned under the relevant statute. One such statute which fell for consideration before the SC in [State of Karnataka vs. Ecom Gill Coffee Trading Private Limited](https://indiankanoon.org/doc/122433734/) was the Karnataka VAT Act, 2003 (“KVAT”). As per Section 70 of the KVAT, the burden of proving the genuineness of a transaction for the purpose of availing ITC is on the purchasing dealer. Admittedly, the provision does not prescribe the nature of documents to be produced or obligations for discharging such burden. The High Court (“HC”) in this case had allowed the claim for ITC on the ground that the sale price was paid to the seller by an account (AC) payee cheque and that copies of invoices were produced. The tax department was in appeal against this judgment before the SC. Justice Shah reversed the finding of the HC, thereby introducing onerous & stringent conditions for availing ITC. It was held that the dealer claiming ITC has to prove **_beyond doubt_** the actual transaction which can be proved by furnishing the name and address of the selling dealer, details of the vehicle which has delivered the goods, payment of freight charges, acknowledgement of taking delivery of goods, tax invoices and payment particulars, etc. The aforesaid information would be in addition to tax invoices, particulars of payment, etc.

These documents and obligations are absent under the relevant law. Yet, Justice Shah wrote a judgment expanding the scope of the Assessing Officer’s (“AO”) powers to reject a taxpayers claim to ITC. It is important to note that the SC has rejected reliance on payment through banking channels. A direct fall-out of such an expansive proposition can be felt in other similarly worded tax laws (including GST) wherein the tax department can now insist on onerous documentation even though the transactions have been made through banking channels. The other fall-out is the test of the discharging the burden “beyond doubt”. The “beyond doubt” test (which is borrowed from criminal law, and is generally thought of as a burden on the State), without any guidance or determinative factors, unnecessarily burdens the buyer. A long list of judgments under indirect tax laws have stated that the buyer will not be penalised for a tax fraud committed by the seller. The legislature in its wisdom prescribes/doesn’t prescribe documents/obligations for the discharge of the burden, keeping in view the case to case peculiarities of commercial transactions. A judge-made condition/obligation, with no reference to the underlying law, muddies waters and complicates the implementation of law. It has the tendency to become a weapon in the hands of tax department, rather than a measure of regulation.

## Article 142 – complete injustice

In Ashish Agarwal, the tax department had challenged the quashing of tax notices for reassessment which were issued under the unamended section 148 of the ITA, when in fact, the ITA had already been amended with the introduction of a new regime for reassessment under section 148A. Various HCs in the country had ruled in favour of the taxpayers stating that such notices couldn’t have been issued under the unamended provisions (as those provisions had been replaced by the new regime). However, in the appeals, Justice Shah invoked Article 142 (i.e., the power of the Court to do “complete justice”) of the Constitution to validate tax notices issued for reassessment of income of the taxpayers. The use of Article 142 powers in tax matters has been the subject matter of debate between legal luminaries (here and here). Leaving the larger debate aside, a reading of Justice Shah’s decision makes it clear that there was no ground available to the SC for invoking Article 142.

Justice Shah acknowledged the following important aspects in his ruling:

1. The introduction of section 148A is a game changer
2. Under the new regime, there is a change in procedural safeguards
3. The notices ought not to have been issued under un-amended law but under the new provision of Section 148A
4. There was genuine non-application of the amendments

A reading of the above observations would give an impression (rightly so) that the amended provision is a substantial change in law and affects the procedural safeguards as well vested rights of the assessees. Ordinarily (and after having acknowledged that the notices were wrongly issued), the HC judgments would not have been disturbed at all. However, after observing the above, Justice Shah, suo motu, noted that it was a bona fide belief of the Revenue (i.e., the State) that amendment wasn’t made effective. It is on the basis of this observation, completely unsupported by law and bereft of any reasoning, that the SC concluded that some leeway ought to be given to the tax department and deems (through a legal fiction) the old notices to be issued under new regime.

This is a leap of faith in as much as the court is effectively stating that though the Government has notified the amendment, its own machinery is blissfully unaware of the same (and is entitled to benefit – at the cost of the assessee – from its own lack of awareness). What is even more interesting is that this wasn’t even the case of the department. The order doesn’t state this as the Union’s contention or argument. There was no scope for invocation of the discretionary powers of the SC under Article 142 in view of the aforementioned findings. It further ignores the now famous dictum of Justice HR Khanna that it is essential that those who are entrusted with the task of calculating and realising taxes should familiarise themselves with the relevant provisions and become well versed with the law on the subject.

Apart from this, the ruling very conveniently ignores ignorantia juris non-excusat (“ignorance of law is no excuse) to show some leeway to department. This strikes at the very root of the doctrine of strict interpretation of tax laws and also goes contrary to the canons of taxations as enumerated by Adam Smith.

## Expanding the scope of tax department’s jurisdiction

Transfer Pricing litigation revolves around factual issues, such as use of comparable companies in the transfer pricing study, financial ratios, functions-assets-risk analysis or the method adopted to determine the arms’ length price under Chapter X of the ITA, namely, Sections 92, 92A to 92CA, 92D, 92E and 92F of the Act and Rules 10A to 10E of the Rules. An appeal to the HC lies only on substantial question of law. The tax department has to show some perversity in the order of the tax tribunal. HCs have refused intervention in transfer pricing litigation on grounds that the tax tribunal is the final fact-finding authority. However, Justice Shah in SAP Labs India Pvt Ltd disturbed that sense of finality that many taxpayers had achieved in transfer pricing litigation at the tribunal level. More damaging are the observations wherein the SC states that the HC can now examine whether the factual issues have been considered judiciously and on the basis of relevant material. While stating so, Justice Shah has not laid down the parameters to decide what is judicious or relevant and what is not. Hence, the gates have been opened wide for the tax department to now question each and every factual aspect of the transfer pricing litigation.

## Restricting the rights of taxpayers

In Wipro Ltd, the SC was faced with the issue of whether a claim once made in the original return can be subsequently withdrawn by filing the revised return under section 139(5). The assessee had initially claimed deduction under section 10B of ITA while filing the original return and had thus opted not to carry forward the loss in view of the income being exempt. However, subsequently it filed a revised return by giving up claim under section 10B and reinstating its claim of carry forward of loss. The department sought to disallow the same in view of the fact that the said option was not exercised within the due date of filing of return as required under section 10B(8) and according to it, the same could not have been done by filing revised return. Justice Shah denied the deduction to the assessee on the grounds that the an assessee claiming exemption has to strictly comply with the conditions.

Justice Shah based his judgment on the premise that Section 10B is an exemption and hence the conditions mentioned therein had to be strictly construed. However, in doing so, Justice Shah lost sight of the ruling of the SC in Yokogawa India Ltd. wherein it has been held that Section 10B is a provision for deduction and not an exemption. Hence, the test doesn’t apply in its strict sense.

Further, Justice Shah denied the withdrawal of claim under the revised return under section 139(5) on the basis that the withdrawal of claim would fall outside the scope of section 139(5). This finding is bereft of any reasoning or analysis. Finally, there was no discussion whatsoever on the long standing judicial precedent in Jute Corporation of India which has held that an assessee can make additional claims to the claims not made in the income tax return, at the stage of assessment as well as appellate proceedings. Hence, substantial rights of the assessees have been restricted without any meaningful discussion on the statutory scheme or judicial precedents.

## New doctrine – department cannot be left remediless

Justice Shah has time and again incorporated a previously unknown doctrine to grant some relaxation or benefit to the tax department i.e. “the department cannot be left remediless.” For example, in Abhisar Buildwell, after holding in favour of the taxpayers that the department cannot make additions to the income in absence of any incriminating material under section 153A of the ITA, Justice Shah nonetheless went on to hold that the power of tax department to reassess income under the general provision section 147/148 ought to be saved, otherwise it would be left without remedy. The conspectus of the matter would reveal that there was absolutely no need for such an observation because this was never the issue in question. This seemingly innocuous finding has given the tax department enough powers to seek reassessment of income in the same proceedings in which they have failed under section 153A, even though the period of limitation may have lapsed. On similar lines, in Ashish Agarwal, Justice Shah decided to give some leeway to the tax department only after observing that the department cannot be made remediless.

This benevolent test of being left remediless has never been applied in tax jurisprudence before these judgments, and is unheard of. The consequence of such observations has also lead to complications post the pronouncement of judgments. As an exhibit, after the Abhisar Buildwell matter, the Union filed a clarification application seeking clarification that the notice under section 148 could be issued notwithstanding the fact that the period of limitation has lapsed.

## Conclusion

It has now been well recognised that arbitrary assessments and procedures of taxations are reprehensible. It is social injustice by the tax collector to the people. It is the court’s duty to not be an enabler of such social injustice through whimsical taxation. A careful analysis shows that the judgments of Justice Shah have resulted in:

1. Enlarging the procedural powers and substantial jurisdiction of tax department at the cost of restricting or reducing the rights of the taxpayers.
2. Using of judicial discretion in favour of tax department, where no such room for discretion existed in the first place.
3. The interest of tax department has been put on a higher pedestal, to an extent where even if the department has faltered, it cannot be left remediless.
4. Well established judicial precedents have been disturbed to give a fresh lease to the actions of the tax department.
5. Reduced certainty and clarity in implementation of tax laws in the country.

A perusal of the above reveals that Justice Shah is leaving behind a legacy which will be remembered for expanding the scope of the State power, taxation being a small but important aspect of it. Justice Shah’s tax jurisprudence has indeed been an enabler of inflicting social injustice at the hands of the tax collector. Justice Easwar had once held that a court cannot impose its moral standards in tax matters as there is no equity about a tax. Viewed thus, Justice Shah’s judicial philosophy in tax matters has been far away from and at odds with the basic philosophy of taxation i.e. equity, certainty, economy & convenience but tied very closely to the moral standards that he may have held.
