---
title: "The Supreme Court’s Maharashtra Political Crisis Judgment – II: On the Tenth Schedule and the Symbols Order"
author: "Yogesh Byadwal"
date: 2023-05-21
editorsNote: "This guest post by Yogesh Byadwal continues this blog’s examination of the Supreme Court’s judgment in the Maharashtra Political Crisis case. [Part One](https://indconlawphil.wordpress.com/2023/05/11/the-supreme-courts-maharashtra-political-crisis-judgment-i-to-be-hoisted-on-someone-elses-petard/) is available here."
tags:
  - "anti-defection"
  - "anti-defection"
  - "election-commission"
  - "fourth-branch-institutions"
  - "legislature-executive-relations"
  - "parliamentary-democracy"
  - "the-legislature"
  - "the-speaker"
---

Recently, the Supreme Court announced its verdict in Subhas Desai v. Principal Secretary, Governor of Maharashtra & Ors. The court concluded that the Governor was not justified in calling upon Mr. Thackeray to prove his majority and the decision of the speaker in recognising the whip appointed by Shiv Sena legislature party(SSLP) was incorrect, since a whip can only be appointed by the political party. The court rejected the request of restoring status quo ante since Mr. Thackeray did not face the floor test and tendered his resignation.

In this post, I will focus on the part of judgement dealing with the relationship between the [Tenth schedule](https://www.mea.gov.in/Images/pdf1/S10.pdf) and [Para 15 of symbols order](https://upload.indiacode.nic.in/showfile?actid=AC_CEN_3_81_00001_195143_1517807327542&type=order&filename=Election%2520Symbol%2520Order,%25201968.pdf). The Tenth Schedule of the Constitution – or the anti-defection law deals with disqualifications of sitting members of Parliament and state legislatures on grounds of defection from their political parties. Para 15 of the Symbols order, on the other hand, deals with recognition of registered political parties by the Election Commission of India (ECI) for the purpose of allotment and reservation of election symbols to the recognized political party, and further allotment of election symbols to the candidates sponsored by them at the time of elections.

On the relationship between the two, the Supreme Court concluded that the respective outcomes need not be consistent because each is based on different considerations. The Court held that the adjudication of any dispute under these laws must be independent of each other, and the decision of one authority cannot be relied upon by the other for deciding the matter under its own consideration. I argue that the reasoning used by the court, while acknowledging that the two proceedings are intertwined, creates an artificial separation. I will highlight three major inconsistencies in this judgement which will lead to undesirable results in the future. I have divided the posts in three parts to put into perspective the various aspects of the judgement. I conclude that the reluctance on part of the court to put the controversy to rest in the present case has implication for representative democracy, as the abuse of these provisions will continue unabated.

## Positives

The judgement begins striking all the right notes. It acknowledges the intertwined relationship of the Tenth schedule and the Symbols order while deciding intra-party disputes. It notes:

> When the Tenth Schedule and the Symbols Order are invoked concurrently, complications may arise … if the ECI applies the ‘test of majority,’ it will be required to consider (among other things) which of the two factions enjoys a majority in the Maharashtra State Legislature. Therefore, which faction has a majority in the House will have some bearing on the outcome of the proceedings before the ECI. Whether or not a particular faction has a majority in the legislature will depend on whether members from that faction have incurred disqualification … the outcome of the dispute before the ECI may change depending on the outcome of the disqualification petitions.

I have previously argued [here](https://indconlawphil.wordpress.com/2023/03/07/guest-post-the-shiv-sena-dispute-the-tenth-schedule-and-the-symbols-order/) how the ‘different fields theory’ does not have an application when it comes to the Symbols Order and the Tenth Schedule. Rather, the decision under Para 15 of the Symbols Order has significant bearing on disqualification proceedings, since ignoring the same would have ‘irreversible consequences.’ Simply put, if the ECI decides that the rebel faction is the original political party, it would mean they never effectively left the party, engaged in anti-party activities, or defied any party whip. Therefore, the Speaker would have no grounds to disqualify the members. The observations in the judgement are clearly opposed to the reasoning which has been employed by ECI frequently in deciding Para 15 dispute – that Para 15 and the Tenth Schedule operate in two distinct fields. Also, the Court makes it clear that ECI is not supposed to use only the ‘test of [legislative] majority’ in each and every case as has been the practice post [Sadiq Ali](https://indiankanoon.org/doc/876928/). Rather, the ECI can use other tests in order to reach a conclusion under Paragraph 15 of the Symbols Order, such as an evaluation of the majority in the organisational wings of the political party, an analysis of the provisions of the party Constitution, or any other appropriate test. This will help in preventing abuse of the provision by simply proving the majority in legislative wing as in the present case.

## Objections

The SC judgement is, however, problematic in certain aspects. I will highlight three instances where the judgement is flawed in its reasoning.

**Firstly**, the judgement holds:

> … disqualification relates to the date on which the act of defection takes place to mean that acts or events subsequent to the commission of the conduct prohibited under the Tenth Schedule, do not have an exculpatory effect. In other words, subsequent acts or events do not have the effect of curing such conduct or releasing the actor from the consequences which follow.

This essentially means that once a legislator commits any act or omission which makes him liable for disqualification under Para 2, the Speaker can disqualify such member any time thereafter notwithstanding any act or event in the intervening period of the act of defection and decision of disqualification proceedings.

In the present case, this would mean that even if the Shinde faction was declared the ‘original Shiv Sena’ under Para 15 of Symbols order, its members would still be liable to be disqualified by the Speaker since the members of the Shinde Faction stood to be disqualified by the speaker for defying the Chief whip of the party. In fact, the court held:

> The decision of the Speaker recognizing Mr. Gogawale as the Chief Whip of the Shiv Sena is illegal because the recognition was based on the resolution of a faction of the SSLP without undertaking an exercise to determine if it was the decision of the political party … The decision of the Deputy Speaker recognising Mr. Ajay Choudhari as the Whip in place of Mr. Eknath Shinde is valid.

This means that Ajay Choudhari was the whip of the legislative wing of the party in the relevant point of time. The whip was defied by the Shinde faction during various occasions when the whip called to vote against the ‘vote of no-confidence’ which, in turn, calls for disqualification under Para 2(b) . The disqualification will not lead to automatic disqualification from the party but only from the house.

Now suppose that the Speaker today disqualifies the thirty-four MLAs of the Shinde Group. Which party will they belong to? On the reasoning used, it seems obvious that the MLAs are not disqualified from the party to which they originally belonged to i.e. the ticket of the political party from which their faction emerged, which in this case is Shiv Sena lead by Mr. Uddhav Thackeray.

However, in the same breath, the court notes:

> The decision of the ECI has prospective effect. A declaration that one of the rival groups is that political party takes effect from the date of the decision.

This observation would mean that the Shinde faction is the real Shiv Sena, and at the helm of the internal matters and decision. Here, my contention is that if the disqualification will relate back to the date when the impugned act was committed, as the Court notes above, reading it with the observation that such member will remain the member of the party on whose ticket he contested election, only one conclusion can be reached: The disqualified member will still be the member of the party, as it existed then, during the relevant point in time, when the impugned act was committed. In this case, the party Shiv Sena was headed by Mr. Uddhav Thackeray during the relevant point of time. One could argue that ECI order declared the Shinde Faction as the Original Shiv Sena and, therefore, Thackeray faction loses claim to it. However, I am trying to reconcile this situation with the observation of the court that ‘it is up to the political party and its internal process to determine whether to expel a member’. It is hopeless to expect that any action will be taken against the Shinde faction since its members are heading the organization. In this sense, to uphold the intention behind Tenth Schedule, it is essential that the party, as constituted during the relevant point of time, should get an opportunity to decide whether to expel such members. Arguing on the Court’s reasoning only, ‘acts or events subsequent to the commission of the conduct prohibited under the Tenth Schedule, do not have an exculpatory effect’. Therefore, it would be immaterial what the Election Commission holds in the intervening period, as the ‘taint of disqualification does not vaporize.’

The SC also notes that if only some members are disqualified from the group awarded the symbol, then remaining members will have to again apply for a fresh symbol under the Symbols order. Why? Why should the members who are not disqualified subject themselves to symbol order proceedings when they already have been assigned a symbol? Which party did they belong to then? The court provides no answer to these questions. Instead, the reasoning in effect renders the order of the Commission nugatory and ineffective based on the decisions of the speaker under Tenth schedule proceedings.

**Secondly**, the court recognises the interrelationship between Tenth Schedule and Symbols order, when it notes:

> Therefore, which faction has a majority in the House will have some bearing on the outcome of the proceedings before the ECI. Whether or not a particular faction has a majority in the legislature will depend on whether members from that faction have incurred disqualification.

The court here recognises two scenarios-

1. The ECI renders its decision prior to the Speaker’s decision on disqualification ( as in the present case), or;
2. The Speaker decides the disqualification proceedings before ECI’s decision.

It is evident that the latter situation is the ideal position. Symbols Order Para 15 disputes are usually resolved by applying the ‘test of majority’ (among others) to decide which faction is to recognised as the original party. If the disqualification proceedings are completed prior in point of time, ECI will have a clear picture as to which faction commands the majority by accounting for the disqualified members. This would remedy the current situation where the faction declared to the original political party is itself subject to disqualification proceedings. The absurdity of the same has been noted in the previous argument.

However, despite acknowledging the intertwined nature of the proceedings, the Court notes:

> To hold that the ECI is barred from adjudicating petitions under Paragraph 15 of the Symbols Order until the “final adjudication” of the disqualification petitions under the Tenth Schedule would be, in effect, to indefinitely stay the proceedings before the ECI….The ECI, which is a constitutional authority, cannot be prevented from performing its constitutional duties for an indefinite period of time. Proceedings before one constitutional authority cannot be halted in anticipation of the decision of another constitutional authority.

The express concern is that preferring one constitutional authority over another will impinge on the authority of the other. Also raised is the concern of ‘indefinite delay’ which may happen if proceedings before ECI is delayed until Speaker decides disqualification proceedings.

However, the decision of the Court, in fact, enables the encroachment of one constitutional authority over the exclusive domain of other in two ways.

First, the decision notes in Para 157 that it is necessary for the Speaker to determine which is the ‘original political party’ at the time the alleged act of defection was committed. I will consider two scenarios here:

1. Speaker decided prior to ECI
2. ECI decides prior to speaker

Consider a situation where Party X is divided into two faction, A & B. A has 60 and B has 40 members. The Speaker decides that A, in fact, is the original political party on whose ticket members of the faction B fought the elections. Under the Tenth Schedule, speaker disqualifies the members of B faction from the assembly. Note that the members are not disqualified from membership of the party. Therefore, members of B, according to court’s reasoning, will be considered members of Party X after disqualification. In this scenario, even before the ECI decides Para 15 dispute, the issue has been pre-decided by the speaker. The decision of the speaker, then, will have a significant impact on the ECI’s determination, as legislative majority is one of the factors it must consider.

Second, as I have argued here, if the ECI decides the dispute before Speaker, the proceedings before the Speaker become nugatory. For instance, in the present case, the Commission declared the Shinde-faction as the original Shiv Sena party, which meant it never left the party or indulged in anti-party activities or defied any party whip. The pending disqualification petitions are effectively pre-decided by the ECI even before the Speaker. The SC, moreover, notes (excerpted above) that members of the group who have been awarded the original party symbol and not been disqualified from the house, will have to apply under the Symbols Order for a fresh symbol. Isn’t the SC undoing the ECI order under Para 15 order allowing the symbol?

As can be seen, either way, the decision passed by the speaker or the ECI is impinging on the decision making authority of the other by pre-deciding the issue and leading to undesirable results.

**Third**, the court interprets the deletion of Para 3 of the Tenth Schedule to mean:

> The inevitable consequence of the deletion of Paragraph 3 from the Tenth Schedule is that the defence of a split is no longer available to members who face disqualification proceedings. In cases where a split has occurred in a political party or in a legislature party, members of neither faction may validly raise the defence that they are the political party in the event that each faction files petitions for the disqualification of members of the other faction. The defence sought to be availed of must be found within the Tenth Schedule as it currently stands…..The percentage of members in each faction is irrelevant to the determination of whether a defence to disqualification is made out.

The court realises, in fact, that in case where a split has occurred, the only recourse is to have the speaker decide which faction is the original political party. The numbers of the group will not matter; rather the ‘structure of the leadership’ determines the issue. However, the Court also notes that such determination will not impact any other proceedings including the proceedings under Paragraph 15 of the Symbols Order. The court is arguing that both the proceedings are independent of each other. It supplements this by saying that:

> **Whether the decision of the ECI under the Symbols Order must be consistent with the decision of the Speaker under the Tenth Schedule. The answer is no.** This is because the decision of the Speaker and the decision of the ECI are each based on different considerations and are taken for different purposes

This raises the question of whether the court is wilfully ignoring the implications of the acknowledgement that the ‘tenth schedule’ and ‘symbols order para 15’ are intertwined. The aforesaid para gives a clear imprimatur that both constitutional authorities are clear to ignore the decision of the another despite the clear interrelated nature of the proceedings and the undesirable results that might follow. The court does not try to harmonize these processes. Rather, it argues on constitutional lines to argue that one constitutional authority cannot prevent the other from adjudicating where, on the other hand, it clearly allows them to effectively encroach on each other’s exclusive domain leading to undesirable outcomes.

## Causes for Concern

It is disappointing that the judgment fails to put to rest the controversy even when it had the opportunity. In spite of recording that there exists an interrelationship between the Tenth Schedule and the Symbols Order, the Court stops short of providing any solution to the problem. This inconsistency is vulnerable to further abuse in the future. As in the present case, a rebel group within the legislature wing of the party may arise with ministerial ambitions, which, to escape the wrath of Tenth Schedule, will simply claim their group as the original political party based on numbers and hence appropriate the party as their own. The usual practice of the ECI to apply the ‘test of majority’ in such cases enables such tendencies, as it is satisfied with counting the numbers in the house rather than organization wing. This should sound alarm bells for smaller and regional political parties, where the numbers are easier to manipulate with allurements of money and ministerial posts. The present case exemplifies the abuse of this inconsistency, where the Party chief was himself ousted and his party appropriated by his legislators without any determinations as to the organisational structure or support in the organisational wing of the party.

For this reason, the Petitioners requested the court to lay down a ‘constitutional sequence’ to decide such matters which would ensure fairness. They proposed that the ECI must render a decision only after the Speaker decides the Tenth schedule petitions. However, on constitutional lines, court rejected this request. I have already established in this post why this is wrong. Also, if looked from constitutional lens, the request was in fact valid. The Tenth Schedule, which is part of the Constitution, must have precedence over over a statute such as the Symbols Order (see [here](https://indconlawphil.wordpress.com/2023/03/07/guest-post-the-shiv-sena-dispute-the-tenth-schedule-and-the-symbols-order/)) Thus, the Court’s reluctance to resolve the issue is unwarranted, and could lead to similar situations arising in the future.
