---
title: "The Supreme Court’s Maharashtra Political Crisis Judgment – III: On Constitutional Romanticism and the Role of the Speaker"
author: "Chiranth Mukunda"
date: 2023-05-23
editorsNote: "This guest post by Chiranth Mukunda continues the blog series on the Supreme Court’s Maharashtra Political Crisis judgment. Parts [One](https://indconlawphil.wordpress.com/2023/05/11/the-supreme-courts-maharashtra-political-crisis-judgment-i-to-be-hoisted-on-someone-elses-petard/) and [Two](/2023/05/21/the-supreme-court-s-maharashtra-political-crisis-judgment-ii-on-the-tenth-schedule-and-the-symbols-order/) may be read here."
tags:
  - "anti-defection"
  - "anti-defection"
  - "legislature-executive-relations"
  - "parliamentary-democracy"
  - "the-legislature"
  - "the-speaker"
---

On May 11, a five-judge bench of the Supreme Court delivered a unanimous decision with nine conclusions in the Maharashtra political crisis case ([Shubhash Desai vs Principle Secretary](https://main.sci.gov.in/supremecourt/2022/20234/20234_2022_1_1502_44512_Judgement_11-May-2023.pdf)). The complex sequence of events that unfolded involved the roles of constitutional functionaries, including the Governor, the Deputy Speaker (and then the Speaker), the ECI and most importantly, the Court. The political sequence cannot be comprehended without considering the associated decisions by these constitutional functionaries, intermingling with each other and forming a web. [As pointed out previously](https://indconlawphil.wordpress.com/2023/05/11/the-supreme-courts-maharashtra-political-crisis-judgment-i-to-be-hoisted-on-someone-elses-petard/), the interim court order extending the time given to the rebel MLAs for replying to the first batch of disqualification petitions, on natural justice grounds, significantly altered the power equations. The intervening period saw an appointment of a Speaker to the vacant post, the Governor’s call for a floor test, and a change in government.

Now the Supreme Court has held that the decision of the disqualification petitions by the Speaker will only have prospective operation without having an effect on the validity of the proceedings in the intervening period (“Conclusion C”). As the Court recognized, the speaker’s role under the scheme of the Tenth Schedule becomes more significant when there is a factional dispute. It necessitates the speaker to prima facie decide the ‘real’ political party for the purposes of the Tenth Schedule in a situation where different factions emerge. The consequences of this will be discussed later in the essay. The mismatch between the position of the speaker, who continues to be a political figure, and the role entrusted to them, is bound to increase litigation, with consequent time lag, and result in ineffective or infructuous remedies (as in this case).

The continuing contradiction between the role of the speaker under the Tenth Schedule, which envisages the speaker as an impartial adjudicatory authority, and the actual workings of the office, was too visible for the court to have ignored in this case. The judgment glosses over these arguments without addressing the core concern about the partisan actions of the speaker. Constitutional romanticism regarding the supposed neutrality of the speaker continues to have its day. In this piece, by analysing the present judgment, I therefore highlight some inconsistencies that emerge under the current regime of the anti-defection law, which places the speaker at its centre.

## The Interim Measure

The Tenth Schedule makes the Speaker the adjudicatory authority for disqualification petitions. The decision of the speaker is subject to judicial review, as held in Kihoto Hollohan.

Now, considering the possibility of misuse of the Court’s decision in Nabam Rebia, which had held that the Speaker was barred from adjudicating disqualification petitions if a motion for their own removal was pending, and which was referred to a larger 7-judge bench in this case, the Supreme Court here adopted an interim measure to serve the constitutional purpose of the Tenth Schedule. The Court held that the Speaker’s jurisdiction under the Tenth Schedule extends to deciding and ruling upon applications questioning said jurisdiction. Upon an application questioning the jurisdiction of the Speaker (a pending notice of removal under article 179(c) can be an example), the Speaker can either adjourn the proceedings under the Tenth Schedule if the application is bona fide, or proceed with the disqualification petitions with relevant reasons. This decision of the speaker is subject to judicial review.

This interim measure is meant to avoid a ‘constitutional hiatus’ in the operation of the Tenth Schedule. The constitutional ideal would be for the Speaker to act in a fair and impartial manner while considering application which questions their jurisdiction. In reality, this constitutional ideal is unrealisable because the Speaker continues to maintain their political affiliation. In most scenarios, the Speaker will be part of one of the political ‘factions’ that emerge or will have a stake in one of the factions of any other party with whom the possibility of government formation holds, as can be seen even in the Maharashtra political crisis. For example, the newly elected Speaker (whose position itself was a matter of challenge) appointed a new whip from the breakaway legislative party, with whom his party formed the government (an appointment that the court in its analysis held to be illegal). It is important to note that subjecting the decision of the speaker to judicial oversight is only part of the solution. As seen in this case, time holds crucial value in politics: a significant delay in judicial resolution would have altered the balance of power on the ground.

## On Bypassing the Authority of the Speaker

One of the questions that arose was whether the court could decide on disqualification under the Tenth schedule, absent a decision by the speaker. The petitioners urged the court to decide on the matter of disqualification directly, because, they argued, the newly appointed Speaker was proven to be incapable of acting in a fair and impartial manner. The Court rejected this argument by citing a passage from Kihoto Hollohan which held that the office of Speaker embodies propriety and impartiality and that it is inappropriate to express distrust in the office of Speaker in a parliamentary democracy. It was held that since the Speaker was elected by MLAs (including the MLAs against whom disqualification petitions are pending), following the proper procedure laid down in the rules, the Speaker was the appropriate authority to decide the disqualification petitions. Petitioners contended that alternatively, it should be the Deputy Speaker, who was acting in the role of Speaker whose seat was vacant at the time when the alleged act constituting disqualification was made, to decide on the petitions. The Court rejected this on the ground that a Deputy Speaker acts only when the post of Speaker is vacant, and the post of Speaker was occupied as of July 3, 2022. Hence, in this anomalous situation, the incumbent Speaker is now going to decide on the disqualification petitions where the grounds for disqualification include going against the party whip issued to not elect him in the speaker’s election to fill the aforementioned vacancy. Thus, the vacant Speaker’s office at the relevant time effectively smoothed the process for the Shinde Faction, because the deputy speaker’s role was easily neutralised by electing a speaker from the party (BJP) with whom they formed the government, as opposed to the 14-day notice period that is required to remove a Speaker.

At this point, there are two aspects that merit consideration.

## Rule of Law

The Speaker is undoubtedly a member of the political party that forms the government and is an active political figure, which the tenth schedule is incognizant of. There is ample evidence of the Speaker acting in a partisan manner by favouring the government and the ruling party. For the Speaker to continue to hold office, the support of a majority of MLAs is needed, which is usually provided by the MLAs of a ruling party or coalition parties forming the government. In this case, the Speaker was elected by the new coalition consisting of MLAs of the Shinde faction of Shiv Sena and the BJP, which then formed the government. Now, since the decision on the disqualification petition is entrusted to the Speaker, the Speaker’s decision will have a bearing on continuation of his own coalition government (since the Speaker continues to be a party member and a political figure). Impartial exercise of adjudicatory powers might lead to fall of the government of his own party/faction if the MLAs are disqualified. As a result, adjudication by the speaker has the potential to violate the principle of natural justice ‘nemo judex in sua causa ‘or that no one is a judge in his own cause. The court evaded this issue by maintaining the Kihoto line that great traditions of high office of Speaker are not to distrusted with and “…the robes of the Speaker do change and elevate the man inside”.

But it is no answer to say that the Speaker will indeed act impartially; the form of the Speaker’s office – who need not give up his party affiliation upon entering the office – permits reasonable apprehension of bias, which is enough to vitiate the proceedings. However, essentially, the Supreme Court has adopted a view that romanticizes the role of speaker by removing any link between the Speaker and the political party. This is far from the constitutional reality. Therefore, the present regime of anti-defection laws has the potential to violate the rule against bias, which is an essential ingredient of rule of law. The partisan role played by the Speaker was implied when the court held that the appointment of new whip and leader of the legislative party was illegal. But the Court refused to accord it the significance it deserved and deal with the consequences of its finding; rather, it continued to romanticize the high office.

## On the Validity of Proceedings in the Interregnum

The second aspect is the continuation of the Speaker in the office. If the Speaker’s decision on disqualification relates back to the date when the act constituting the disqualification (i.e., the date of defying the party whip or act of voluntarily giving up the membership of the party) was made, the proceedings in the interregnum, which included the election of the Speaker himself, would be cast in doubt. Hence, it is probable that Speaker would decide against the disqualification petitions, being a judge in his own cause, and consequently failing to act in an impartial and fair manner. This line of argument was rejected by the Court by holding that the decision of speaker on disqualification and its consequences will not have a retrospective effect but only a prospective effect from the date of the decision (Para 92). The court did not find any authority on the question of whether the proceedings in the house in the intervening period, between the disqualification-inducing act and the decision by the Speaker, would be subject to the final decision on disqualification. The court considered it afresh and held it in negative. It held that MLAs are entitled to participate in the proceedings until they are disqualified, which is the date when the speaker makes the decision.

In its reasoning, the court held that situation under article 189(2) (which stipulates that the validity of any proceedings of the legislature shall not be questioned on the ground that it was discovered subsequently that a legislator who was not entitled to vote or sit, took part in the proceedings) never arose, because the decision of the speaker on disqualification is only prospective. The court interpreted Rajendra Singh Rana to mean that the relevant reference point of time for the Speaker’s decision on disqualification is the time of the prohibitory act under tenth schedule. It means that even though the Speaker makes the decision with reference to a back date, the consequences of the decision will take effect only from the date of the decision by the Speaker, i.e., the member may have incurred disqualification under the Tenth Schedule prior, but the seat becomes vacant only after the decision on disqualification by the speaker. This effectively means that the Tenth Schedule operates from the date the Speaker wishes for it to operate, because the rigours of disqualification are incurred only from the date the Speaker makes the decision, and the proceedings in the intervening period are protected. This is compounded by the fact that there is no time limit for the speaker to make a decision (without a judicial order). The only requirement is that the decision be made in ‘reasonable time’.

## Speakers’ Role under the Tenth Schedule when there is an Effective ‘Split’

The Court held that the Speaker who is the adjudicatory authority under the Tenth Schedule, may be called to decide who is the ‘real’ political party or the ‘original political party’ for the purpose of disqualification under paragraphs 2(1)(a) and 2(1)(b) of the Tenth Schedule. Since the defence of split is no longer available after the ninety-first constitutional amendment, one of the factions/groups is bound to lose out if they are considered by the speaker not to be the political party at the time the act constituting defection was made. When two or more factions issue whips, the court held that the speaker has to prima facie decide, for the purpose of para 2(1)(a) and 2(1)(b), which whip represents the political party (not the legislative party); but this has no bearing on the decision by the ECI under paragraph 15 of the Elections Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order. Similarly, the Court held that the decision of ECI on which group or faction is the ‘real’ political party under paragraph 15 of the Symbols Order will have no bearing on the decision of the speaker, who has to decide which group or faction is the political party for the purpose of making a decision on the question of disqualification, with reference to the date on which the member voluntarily gives up his membership or defies the whip. This means that in the present case, the decision of the ECI recognizing the Shinde Faction as the real Shiv Sena will have no bearing on the decision of the speaker, who has to make a decision considering the facts on the day the act incurring disqualification was committed (see Part II of this series for a detailed critique).

The decision of the ECI under paragraph 15 of the Symbols order will only be prospective in operation. The court also held that the proceedings under paragraph 15 of symbols order cannot wait until the final adjudication under the Tenth Schedule. This is because, the ‘test of legislative majority’ is not the only test but merely one of the factors to be considered while making the decision. When legislative strength is in doubt (example, when disqualification petition is pending), other factors should be given greater weight.

Importantly, the court here is envisaging similar roles for the Speaker and the ECI in deciding who is ‘real’ Shiv Sena, albeit for different purposes, by banking on the impartial role that the Speaker ought to play. The factors which the Speaker has to consider overlap with the factors which the ECI considers while resolving factional disputes. In both cases, the Court discouraged using the ‘test of legislative majority’ and suggested looking for the structure of leadership outside the legislature (para 168), and other factors in cases where legislative strength is a matter of dispute, as in this case, because of pending disqualification petitions. In this scenario, it is entirely possible for the Speaker and ECI to reach different conclusions on which faction or group is the ‘real’ political party for the purpose of disqualification and granting symbols, respectively. Here again, the role, position and capacity of the Speaker to perform the task is doubtful. Since the Speaker could well be a member of a political faction, his functioning will be biased towards a particular faction. In absence of objective criteria like the strength in the legislature, subjective political considerations are bound to play a decisive role. This might result in the Speaker being the kingmaker, with his faction being saved from the proceedings of disqualification. It might be said that the decision of the Speaker is subject to judicial review, but once again, with the time factor making the crucial difference, it is unclear how effective this will be (as the present case itself amply demonstrates); furthermore, the repeated need for judicial involvement, thereby increasing the role of the judiciary in settling disputes of political nature, will not bode well for a constitutional democracy and judicial independence.

The original sin lies in the Tenth Schedule, which envisaged a quasi-judicial adjudicatory role for the speaker, who nonetheless continues to be a member of a political party either de facto or de jure. Recognising the pattern of partisan actions by the Speaker, the court in Keisham Meghachandra Singh vs Hon’ Speaker Manipur, made observations regarding the need for an independent adjudicatory mechanism outside the house in the form of a tribunal. The speaker being an authority within the house, and his tenure being dependent on the majority will, the court reasoned, create a potential for bias. Similarly, in Shrimanth Baladaheb Patil vs Hon Speaker, the court recognized the growing trend of speakers acting against their constitutional role of being neutral. Hence, this case once again underscores the need for a revaluation of the Speaker’s role under Tenth schedule.

## Conclusion

With factional disputes reaching the courts and repeated instances of constitutional functionaries disregarding their constitutional role which leads to judicial intervention, the Court is becoming an arena for waging political battles. This ‘judicialization of politics’ by increasing the role of the court might lead to the court being accused of political bias. Outsourcing political decisions and the constitutionally entrusted roles of other functionaries to the courts is a growing trend. This has happened with explicit or implicit acceptance of political actors in the hope of favourable judicial decisions or simply to avoid making a decision to escape accountability. With politically consequential decisions increasingly emanating from the bench, the judiciary becomes the target for control, with threat to its independence. In political disputes like these, balancing the opposing political interests in the backdrop of judiciary’s institutional interest, judges are made to engage in a political balancing act.

One high constitutional office that has been repeatedly accused of partisan bias is the office of the Speaker. Disregarding constitutional conventions by the Speaker has been a regular feature both in the parliament and the state legislatures. This political crisis is a feature of it; paradoxically, however, the judgement reinforces that very existing framework of the Speaker at the centre of the Tenth Schedule, which is the cause of the problems that brought this dispute to Court.
